---
layout: post
title:  "The things in these proofs are really weird"
tags: teaching math
katex: true
---

Reflecting on Ben Blum-Smith's classic post, [The things in proofs are weird](https://blogs.ams.org/matheducation/2020/05/20/the-things-in-proofs-are-weird-a-thought-on-student-difficulties/); here's a couplea proofs where the things are very weird.

## The vanishing quotient theorem

Here is a theorem that is often given as an exercise in a group theory class: If $G/Z(G)$ is cyclic, then $G$ is abelian.

[The proof](https://bsky.app/profile/sbagley.bsky.social/post/3ljnzmjnvgk27) is one of these elementary ones that comes out as soon as you write down all the relevant definitions. Write $Z$ for $Z(G)$ and suppose that $G/Z$ is cyclic. Then it is generated by one element, and elements of $G/Z$ are cosets of $Z$, so say $G/Z = \langle gZ \rangle$.

Now our goal is to show that $G$ is abelian, so let's take some arbitrary $x, y\in G$ and argue that they commute. Since the cosets of $Z$ partition $G$, , $x$ lives in some coset of $Z$, and since $G/Z$ is cyclic, every coset of $Z$ looks like $g^n Z$ for some integer $n$. Therefore, $x=g^n z$ for some element $z\in Z$; similarly, for some arbitrary $y\in G$, $y = g^m z'$ for some element $z' \in Z$. Both $z$ and $z'$ commute with everything since they were elements of $Z(G)$, and $g^n$ and $g^m$ certainly commute with each other, so:
$$
\begin{align*}
    xy &= (g^n z) \cdot y \\
       &= g^n (y\cdot z) = g^n (g^m z') z \\
       &= (g^m g^n) z'z = g^m (z'\cdot g^n) z \\
       &= yx. 
\end{align*}
$$
Therefore, $G$ is abelian, hooray.

But now take a look at the consequences of what we've just proved. Since $G$ is abelian, $Z(G) = G$ -- that's right, $Z(G)$ is **all** of $G$! Remember how we said $x = g^n z$ for some integer $n$ and some element $z\in Z(G)$? Well, by golly, $n = 0$ and $z=x$! What a bullshit argument this has turned out to be!!

To think our way through this proof, we had to believe implicitly that $x$ was some *non-central* element of $G$, so that we could think about which implicitly *non-identity* coset of $Z$ it lived in, so that we could use the structure of the implicitly *non-trivial* quotient group, so that we could say $x = g^n z$. But all of that was kinda wrong!!!

This is why, [thanks to Andrew Stacy](https://bsky.app/profile/mathforge.org/post/3lorf74l6qk2u), I now refer to this as the "vanishing quotient theorem:" if $G/Z(G)$ is cyclic, then it vanishes.

## $pqr$-groups

Here's another thing I've been playing around with lately. Suppose $|G| = pqr$, where $p<q<r$ are primes. There's lots you can say about the structure of such a group, but here's one thing whose proof is weird: the $r$-Sylow subgroup of $G$ is normal.

*Proof*: Let $R$ be an $r$-Sylow subgroup of $G$, and suppose that $R$ is not normal. Possible values of $n_r$ are $1$, $p$, $q$, or $pq$. $1$ is out because $R$'s not normal. $p$ and $q$ are both out because they're too small to be $1 \mod r$. Therefore $n_r = pq$.

Well, that takes up a hell of a lot of the space in $G$; specifically, there are $pq(r-1)$ elements of order $r$. This only leaves room for exactly one $p$-Sylow subgroup $P$, and exactly one $q$-Sylow subgroup $Q$; therefore, both $P$ and $Q$ must be normal in $G$. 

Since $Q\triangleleft G$, $QR \lt G$, and since $Q\cap R = 1$, $|QR| = qr$. Therefore, $[G:QR] = p$, and since $p$ is the smallest prime dividing $|G|$, $QR$ must be normal in $G$ by the small-index lemma.